In this video, let us discuss about the sliding window
technique.
The sliding window is an effective technique to solve problems
in O(n) time complexity which are normally
solved in O(n^2), O(n*k)
time in brute force
So what kind of problems can be solved using the
sliding window technique? And how can you identify sliding window
problems? The problems that are dealing with iterable order
data structures like an array, string and linked list are
such problems and the problems' requirement should be finding or
calculating something among all the contiguous sub array
or sub strings or sub lists.
See some examples
Smaller sub with a given sum, maximum sum sub array of size k
Longest sub string with k distinct characters etcetera
Here you can notice all the given problems involve array
and string data structures and the requirement is finding something
on its sub array or sub string
These kind of problems can be solved using the sliding
window technique.
Let us solve a problem to understand the advantages of
the sliding window technique.
Given an array, we need to find the sum of
all contiguous sub arrays of size k
So let us take this array of size six with elements
1, 5, -1, 6, 3 and 2 and let k be 3.
We need to find the sum of all contiguous
sub array of size three.
So how many sub arrays are present in this array
with size three? We have 1, 5, -1, and it's
sum is equal to five.
Then we have 5, -1, 6 and it's sum is
equal to 10. Then -1, 6, 3 and here the sum
will be equal to 8.
Then we have 6 3 2 and it's sum will be 11
So let's see the code for a normal brute force method.
Here size of the array is six and
the sub array is three.
The last sub array's starting index will be three which
is 6-3
So in general, for an array of size n and
sub array is k the last sub array's starting
index will be n-k. So we need to
run the outer for loop for n-k times
and for each index we need to calculate the sum for
k elements
So we are running the inner for loop for
i+k times and calculating the sub array sum
so this is the brute force code for sum
of all contiguous sub arrays of size k.